		Dear Misha,
Here follow my comments on the history of the Yang-Mills field.

1.Geometry and Physics.
	The basic role of geometry in fundamental physics was predicted in
XIX century by Lobachevsky and Riemann. The first real breakthrough was
done by Einstein in his theory of gravitation. At that time only two
fields - EM and gravitational were known. Naturally people began to look
for the geometrical interpretation of the Maxwell's EM field. First
attempt by H. Weyl in 1918, based on the scale transformation (and
conformal structure of space-time) was wrong. However it underlined
the role of the vector-potential in the description of the EM field.
Also the term "gauge-invariance" (eich-invarianz) was introduced
for the first time.
	The proper role of these two notions was realized after the
advent of Schroedinger version of Quantum Mechanics by Fock and London
in 1926. The gauge transformation was realized as the localized change
of the phase of complex wave function and vector potential entered
through the "long" momentum operator.
	I the independent papers of Weyl and Fock of 1929 the first
nonabelian gauge group appeared as that of the local Lorentz transformation
of the moving frame, indispencible in the description of spinors, entering 
the (first-quantized) Dirac equation. The spin connection transformation
law already involved all attributes of the nonabelian gauge fields.
	Another geometric idea was connected with higher dimensional
space-time (Kaluza-Klein), where the EM vector potential appeared as the
off-diagonal \mu 5 (or 5\mu) element of the 5-dimensional metric. This
idea was generalized by O. Klein in 1938 and W. Pauli in 1953 to
higher dimensional (e.g. 6 or 7) space-time and also led to several aspects
of the nonabelian gauge field theory.

2. Yang and Mills.
	Isospin and analogy between EM and meson nuclear force naturally
led to the idea of the localized isospin transformation. It was realized
in the paper of Yang and Mills of 1954. Pauli (who knew main formula
through his Kaluza-Klein-like approach) immediately raised the problem
of mass of charged vector fields. The adequate answer was to be waited
for until the beginning of 70-ties.
	However several lines of thought gradually led to more wide
acceptance of the Y-M idea. Among them were search for universal weak
interactions, current algebra and application of the group theory to the
systematization of hadrons. Names of Feynman, Gell-Mann, Schwinger,
Sakurai are relevant here. The collection of translations "Compensating
fields", edited by Ivanenko around 1963, illustrates this development.
Still nobody (besides Schwinger) attempted the quantization problem.
	In the USSR due to the (correct) results by Landau et al
for QED the field theory was forbidden.

3. My story.
	I graduated from Physics Dept. of Leningrad University in 1956,
had my PhD there in 1959, working mostly on mathematical aspects of
quantum scattering theory. From the fall of 59 I belonged to Steklov
Math. Inst. in SPb. Around 1964, after reasonable success of my treatment
of the 3-particle system, I decided, that now I can (have enough force)
turn to QFT. Of course, I knew about the difficulties in QED, so I began
to learn gravity. I began to read monographs on gravity (e.g. that by
A. Lichnerovitz and Ivanenko's volume mentioned above). But then
occasionally I came across Feynman's lecture on quantum gravity,
published in the "Polonica Physica Acta". This was (apparently
unauthorized) transcript of his talk at the gathering of the
gravitationists, at that time completely separated from the HEP community.
In this lecture he presented his results on one loop calculations
for YM S-matrix. He was prompted to this by Gell-Mann, who recommended
him YM just as a toy model for gravity with vector particles instead
of tensor - great simplification for combinatorics.
	Feynman used his own diagrammatic technique in its naive form:
classical lagrangian is a quadratic form + higher order terms. They
define propagator and vertices, correspondingly. Because of the gradient
invariance (let us use once Fock's term) propagator is defined up to
longitudal term, which enters with an arbitrary coefficient. It was
expected, that physical amplitudes does not depend on the latter just as
in QED. However Feynman found, that it was not the case.
	As is well known, in 1948 Feynman derived the diagram technique
for QED via functional integral. But this derivation was not understood
by public and was substituted by the paradigm, formulated above. I find
it strange, that Feynman did not return to his own derivation and
diagrammatic rules to resolve the paradox. Instead he tried to correct
calculation by the fashionable in 60-ties considerations based on
analyticity principles. Namely for one loop the imaginary part
of amplitude has only tree contribution. The real part then is
reconstructed via dispersion relation.
	Feynman found, the the result differ from the naive one-loop result 
by a term , which can be interpreted as a contribution of a fictitious
(as he called it) scalar particle. Interesting enough this contribution 
enters with - sigh, characteristic of fermion statistics.
	After this he proceeded to look for more general rules but failed.
In particular he proposed to add the (non gauge invariant) mass term, use
proper diagram technique and get the answer as a limit when m -> 0.
As we know now (first shown by Slavnov and me in 1968) it was wrong.
Even in one loop the results differ by a factor 1/2.
	So reading Feynman lecture I realized the challenge at the very
basic point of QFT. The classical lagrangian was not enough to define
quantum theory. It became clear, that here is the place, where I can begin
to work on QFT.
	Another stimulus to do YM was pure mathematical. Knowing the name
of Lichnerowitz because of his monograph on gravitation, I looked into
his another book on differential geometry, dedicated mostly to the theory
of connections. Curiously enough I acquired this rather thin volume on the
streetstand with second hand books for 43 kopecs. From it I found that
YM field has a definite geometrical meaning as a connection in the vector
bundle. This immediately gave me a geometrical picture for constructing the
interactions: matter field define a linear (or nonlinear as in
\sigma-model) space, where they get their values (now we say target);
this space is a fiber in a vector bundle with space-time being the base.
Thus matter fields are sections of this bundle. The interaction is
introduced via connection, which is another type of a field.
	In this way the YM theory became as geometric as Einstein's
gravity. Moreover, idea of a fiber, independent of space-time and/or
its tangent plane, was certainly a generalization of geometry in pure
gravity theory. The matter fields were not only tensors (or spinors)
but carried other labels, associated with the space of charges, encoded
in the basics compact group, which had nothing to do with the Lorentz
group.
	This geometrical picture, which crystallized in my mind in the
middle of 1965, was another basic point of departure for my work on the
quantization of YM field, which I rather slowly began to work on.
	I want to stress here, that these mathematical intuitive 
considerations were my real ideological base, which I formulated for myself
before concrete work.
	Victor Popov was my graduate student at the beginning of 60-ties,
whom I inherited from Yu. Novozhilov when he left Steklov because of
the canceling academic positions (half-jobs) for University professors.
His PhD thesis was dedicated to Bose gas, where he proposed an adequate
diagram technique valid for any interaction potential (we have a joint
article in JETP in 1963). SO I had a technically qualified collaborator.
	It was clear, that the main new feature of YM is nontrivial
gauge covariance. It is not a point in space of fields (concrete field),
but an orbit of the gauge group (class of gauge equivalent fields) which
plays the role of physical configuration. Functional (Feynman) formulation
of QFT was most natural to take this into account. Namely, one was sum up
over the gauge orbits rather than over fields. Thus a new question
aroused - how to define the measure in the space of orbits.
	First thing was to parameterize orbits. This was simple - the
standard gauge condition (like the Lorentz or Coulomb) does it. The
inclusion of gauge condition into functional integral amounts to
introducing the \delta-function. However it is not enough. Indeed,
contrary to QED, the gauge orbits of YM intersect the gauge plane with
angle, depending on the field variables. Thus one must introduce
corresponding jacobian. Scattering theory already taught me about
determinants of differential operators, so I supposed, that the sought
jacobian is a determinant of some natural differential operator,
associated with Lorentz condition. The only candidate was the operator
of the equation, which is to be satisfied by the infinitesimal gauge
parameter, when the Lorentz condition is imposed on the fields. One
day in the fall of 66 I discussed all this with Victor - next day he
returned with derivation, based on the insertion of unity: the form
of the \delta-function, averaged by gauge group. It was clear that this
formal trick solves the problem. However I was not completely satisfied.
Indeed, derivation was based on the trick and did not take into account
the unitarity.
	There was no rush in publishing. We did not know anybody doing
quantum YM. In the end of 66 I was allowed for the first time to go
abroad for a long time (two months). I visited IHES near Paris, where
Leon Motchane (Anselm's uncle) was director. I was invited as a specialist
in quantum 3-body problem. It was not clear, with whom to discuss my new
things. In fact, S. Deser visited IHES at the same time and we lived in
the same Residence. It was quite instructive to discuss classical
gravity with him. He introduced me to Lichnerowitz and I even has given
a talk on their seminar, discussing the problem of positivity of mass.
Occasionally I mentioned to Deser Feynman lecture and my interest in
YM. It happened that he participated in Polish conference and he brought
the name of De-Witt to me. I found, that De-Witt successfully continues
Feynman's approach to quantization by reconstructing amplitudes from
their imaginary parts. It became clear, that it was time to publish
something about our approach. Before leaving France I discussed YM with
Stora and he was the first person really supporting our staff.
	If I remember right, Veltman also visited IHES during my time
and spoke about massive YM. But I was too shy to approach him.
	In the meantime the problem of unitarity was solved. The
Coulomb gauge allowed to reduce the functional integral to manifestly
hamiltonian form, where unitarity is evident.
	Returning home in the mid. January 67 I began to prepare
publication. It was no doubt, that our paper will not be accepted by
JETP. QFT was proclaimed to be dead and YM was especially vulnerable
due to the masslessness of charged components. Fortunately mid. 60-ties
was still kind of thaw period and Soviet physicists were allowed to
publish in a new European journal "Physics Letters". Manuscript was
to be two published pages. So I decided to use this opportunity.
I remember, how careful I was to choose every word to make the text
economical and didactic at the same time. Thus the paper was written,
sent abroad and to our delight immediately accepted. Later Veltman
told me, that he was a referee, did not understand anything, but allowed
publication because of my name in it.
	In two pages it was impossible to explain our philosophy
(hamiltonian method) and technical details, e.g. comments on 
renormalization or the representation of determinant in term of
fermi-integral, where fictitious particles (ghosts) were introduced
in term of their own fields. Thus a problem of an extended publications
still existed. We half-solved it using another new opportunity - the
preprint system of just organized (by Bogolubov) Kiev Institute of
Theoretical Physics. We sent there rather long text, which was published
(in Russian) in summer of 1967.
	This preprint has an interesting story. When YM came to lime-light
due to 't Hooft, it was published in English as a Fermi-Lab preprint
in 1972 by B. Lee. To that time I already visited US (Dec. 71 - March 72)
and met C.N.Yang and Feynman personally. B.Lee was working at Stony-Brook
at the time, so I discussed a lot with him. Curiously enough, in the
preface to translation, written by Lee, it is mentioned, that he publishes
the English version, prepared for Veltman in 1968. So Kiev preprint was
known in Utrecht in 1968.
	I cannot help mentioning that in November 99 I found, that somebody
put on my name in SPIRES the file of Fermi-Lab edition of Kiev preprint
under number 1 contrary to chronological order. I do not know to whom I
should be grateful.
	In the second half of 1967 I had exchange of letters with De-Witt
and Weinberg. De-Witt's version of quantization of gravity and YM appeared
in a monumental paper in summer of 67. His main goal was gauge invariance,
namely independence of amplitudes from the longitudal parts of propagators.
i have written to him, that Victor and me fixed the unitarity. He politely
answered me agreeing that our approaches are rather different in goals
and technique.
	With Weinberg I had contacts before due to our mutual interests in
few-body scattering. So I mentioned to him, that we have now new joint
interest. I referred of course to his new EW model and mentioned, that
may be our diagrammatic rules will be useful to him. He send me back his
preprint and proposed, that I should work on quantization myself. As a
result neither of us paid serious attention to each other.
	To finish this part of the story, let me mention, that I decided to
write an invariant discussion of quantization of systems with constraints.
There were rumours, that Bogolubov will begin a new journal and i had written
a paper with intention to publish it there. Paper was done in the fall of
1967, but the launching of journal was delayed, so it was published only
in Nov. 69 as the very first paper, opening the journal "Theoretical and
Mathematical Physics".

4. Development after 1967.
	There was no doubt for me about renormalization. Moreover, it was
clear, that YM is a rather exceptional QFT. First of all, it has only
logarithmic divergences. Indeed, being massless, there was no problem of
the mass renormalization. Furthermore, the coupling constant entered as
a factor in front of action and the lagrangian density was the only
local gauge invariant term with proper dimension. So the coupling
constant rescaling was the only renormalization required.
	I cannot explain now, why I did not bother to look at the important
sign in one loop renormalization term. Apparently I did not have any worry
about it. The real problem was that of mass and i spent at least two years
on futile efforts to find anomalous Green function in analogy with
fashionable at that time theory of superconductivity. Ironically the
problem of mass and renormalization were found to be tightly connected in
what is called now "dimensional transmutation". But it was realized only
in the beginning of 70-ties by you know whom.
	Recently I asked Slavnov, who joined YM around 1968, why we did not
look at the sign of one loop contribution. He already published the
expression for the renormalization of invariant charge, so one was to sum
up several easily calculable constants. He answered, that in Bogolubov
school, where he was raised, the problem of zero charge was considered
as formal and non-interesting. Unfortunately neither of us knew about
physical considerations of scaling.
	Our collaboration with Slavnov began curiously enough. After one of
my very first talks about diagrammatic rules for YM (apparently in summer
of 1968 in Kiev) he pointed on discrepancy of our results with his one
loop calculation in massive YM case. First he claimed, that our rules
with Popov are mistaken, factor 1/2 was missed. However, as our rules
were based on determinant, I was sure that we are right. So we analyzed
the problem and found that indeed, the vanishing mass limit of massive
YM does not coincide with the result for massless case. The factor 1/2
was expected. In this way we showed, that original Feynman idea was too
lighthearted.
	Slavnov brought in heavy machinery of QFT, formulated the
analogues of Ward identities and derived expression for the invariant
charge. This essentially finished the formal aspects of quantization of
YM field.
	In winter of 69 at the school at Asau I described to Fralkin
my approach to YM. I stressed the fact, that only one renormalization is
needed. He was quite impressed and apparently began to work on YM after
that. However I consider his large paper in Phys. Rev. of 1970 inconclusive.
He made an important statement, that both Feynman and Landau gauge can be 
used (our derivation was based on Landau gauge). but I believe, that
there was no proper derivation. This was done later by 't Hooft via
clever trick of using the inhomogeneous Lorentz condition.
	't Hooft entered this story in 1969 and found the first viable
application of YM. You know what follows.

			with best wishes, Ludwig

P.S. I send you unchecked version to prompt our interaction. Next week I
return from Hamburg and shall correct the draft. L.
